LANGUAGE PROFICIENCY NOTES
Set 1 Test Learnings
Random Examples:
● She had walked only fifteen miles when her legs gave out.
● If we __________ harder we would have passed the UPCAT.
B. had studied
● Father jogs exuberantly to the park every morning before breakfast to exercise his heart.
● By the time the operation ends, Billy _____ a total of 1,300 hours for his friend and
_____ countless outdated magazines in the emergency room waiting area.
A. will have waited...will have read
● Sarah wanted to see the concert; she had been looking forward to it for a long time.
Semicolon is used to connect 2 independent clauses.
Subject-verb agreement (12
rules):https://academicguides.waldenu.edu/writingcenter/grammar/subjectverbagreement

Conditionals
Zero Conditional - General truths and general habits
If + present simple, present simple
Example:
● If you add two and two, you get four.
First Conditional - Possible or likely things in the future
If + present simple, will + infinitive
Example:
● If it rains later, we’ll stay at home.
Second Conditional - Impossible things in the present/unlikely things in the future
If + past simple, would + infinitive
Example:
● If I won the lottery, I would sail around the world.
Third Conditional - Things that didn’t happen in the past and their imaginary results
If + past perfect, would/wouldn't have + past participle.
Examples:
● If you had told me about the meeting, I would have come.
● If you had told me about the meeting, I wouldn’t have missed it.
● If I had studied harder, I would have passed the exam.

Future Tenses and their Uses
Future perfect tense is used when we have to talk about actions indicating a sense of
completion at a certain time in future. These actions take place
1. before another action in future.
2. before a specific time in future.
Example:
❖ She will have finished the project before tomorrow.
❖ I will have gotten my degree by 2022.
Examples of Future Continuous Tense
● The workers will be painting the wall for the next two days. (paint)
● You will be understanding the meaning of my words by the time you finish watching
the movie. (understand)
● Dad will be going to Chennai on Sunday.

●
●
●
●

I will be writing the letter tomorrow.
The baby will be playing the whole night.
I will be helping my mother to make breakfast.
Sheldon will be eating the cake later.

Examples of Simple Future Tense Sentences

● I shall write an essay.
● Ben will sing a good song.
● I shall work hard to obtain good marks.

Set 2 Test Learnings - Random Vocabulary:
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

Asphyxia is an unconscious state.
Gelid means very cold.
Exculpated means proved innocent.
Reticent means meek.
Vociferous means talkative.
Bitiw/Nabitiwan ang tamang pandiwa, hindi ang bitaw/nabitawan sapagkat ang
kahulugan ng bitaw ay sa pagsasabong ng manok at ang bitiw ang pagkaalis o
pagkawala sa pagkakahawak.
Walang unlaping tiga- kaya taga- ang tamang ginagamit. (Example: Taga-Negros)

Punctuation Marks, Purpose, and Example

Semicolon, Colon, Dashes, and Hyphen
Difference of Semicolon and Colon
Semicolons and colons look similar, but they have different functions. Another common mistake
is using a semicolon where a colon should go. Semicolons separate items within a list, while a
colon precedes and introduces a list.

Semicolons
1. To help separate items in a list, when some of those items already
contain commas.

❌

I bought shiny, ripe apples, small, sweet, juicy grapes, and firm pears.

✔ I bought shiny, ripe apples; small, sweet, juicy grapes; and firm pears.
2. To join two sentences.
They could be used to join two (but not all three) of the independent clauses together.

✔I went to the grocery store today; I bought a ton of fruit. Apples, grapes, and pears were all
on sale.
Best Answer

✔I went to the grocery store today. I bought a ton of fruit; apples, grapes, and

pears were all on sale.

❌

I went to the grocery store today; I bought a ton of fruit; apples, grapes, and pears were all
on sale.
But why would I want to use a semicolon here, anyway? One reason might have to do with
style: the three short sentences sound kind of choppy or abrupt. A stronger reason might be if I
wanted to emphasize a relationship between two of the sentences. If I connect “I bought a ton of
fruit” and “Apples, grapes, and pears were all on sale” more closely, readers may realize that the
reason why I bought so much fruit is that there was a great sale on it.

Colons
Colons follow independent clauses (clauses that could stand alone as sentences) and can be used
to present an explanation, draw attention to something, or join ideas together.

Common uses of colons
1. To announce, introduce, or direct attention to a list, a noun or noun phrase, a quotation, or an
example/explanation.
Lists/series example:
We covered many of the fundamentals in our writing class: grammar, punctuation, style, and
voice.
Noun/noun phrase example:
My roommate gave me the things I needed most: companionship and quiet.
Quotation example:
Shakespeare said it best: “To thine own self be true.”
Example/explanation example:
Many graduate students discover that there is a dark side to academia: late nights, high
stress, and a crippling addiction to caffeinated beverages.
2. To join sentences. You can use a colon to connect two sentences when the second sentence
summarizes, sharpens, or explains the first. Both sentences should be complete, and their content
should be very closely related. Note that if you use colons this way too often, it can break up the flow
of your writing. So don’t get carried away with your colons!
Example: Life is like a puzzle: half the fun is in trying to work it out.
3. To express time, in titles, and as part of other writing conventions. Colons appear in several
standard or conventional places in writing. Here are a few examples:

​

With numbers. Colons are used to separate units of time (4:45:00 expresses four
hours, forty-five minutes, and zero seconds); ratios (2:1), and Bible verses and
chapters (Matthew 2:24).

​

In bibliography entries. Many citation styles use a colon to separate information in
bibliography entries.

Example: Kurlansky, M. (2002). Salt: A world history. New York, NY: Walker and Co.
​

With subtitles. Colons are used to separate titles from subtitles.

Example: Everest: The Last Frontier
​

After the salutation in a formal business letter. A colon can be used immediately
after the greeting in a formal letter (less-formal letters tend to use a comma in this
location).

Example: To Whom It May Concern: Please accept my application for the position advertised
in the News and Observer.

Common colon mistakes
1. Using a colon between a verb and its object or complement
Example (incorrect):The very best peaches are: those that are grown in the great state of
Georgia.
To correct this, simply remove the colon.
2. Using a colon between a preposition and its object
Example (incorrect): My favorite cake is made of: carrots, flour, butter, eggs, and cream
cheese icing.
To correct this, simply remove the colon.

3. Using a colon after “such as,” “including,” “especially,” and similar phrases. This violates the rule
that the material preceding the colon must be a complete thought. Look, for example, at the
following sentence:
Example (incorrect): There are many different types of paper, including: college ruled, wide
ruled, and plain copy paper.
You can see that “There are many different types of paper, including” is not a complete sentence.
The colon should simply be removed.

Should you capitalize the first letter after a colon?
Generally, the first word following the colon should be lower-cased if the words after the colon form
a dependent clause (that is, if they could not stand on their own as a complete sentence). If the
following phrase is a complete (independent) clause, you may choose to capitalize it or not.
Whichever approach you choose, be sure to be consistent throughout your paper.
Example with an independent clause, showing two different approaches to capitalization:
The commercials had one message: The geeks shall inherit the earth. (correct)
The commercials had one message: the geeks shall inherit the earth. (correct)
Example with a dependent clause (which is not capitalized):
There are three perfect times to smile: when I’m with friends, when I’m alone, and when I’m
with my dog. (correct)

Summary:
The following is an independent clause: You can capitalize or not. Your choice.
The following is a dependent clause: You CANNOT capitalize. Lower-cased only. No choice.

Dashes
The first thing to know when talking about dashes is that they are almost never required by the laws
of grammar and punctuation. Overusing dashes can break up the flow of your writing, making it
choppy or even difficult to follow, so don’t overdo it.

It’s also important to distinguish between dashes and hyphens. Hyphens are shorter lines (-); they
are most often used to show connections between words that are working as a unit (for example,
you might see adjectives like “well-intentioned”) or to spell certain words (like “e-mail”).
With that background information in mind, let’s take a look at some ways to put dashes to work in
your writing.
1. To set off material for emphasis. Think of dashes as the opposite of parentheses. Where
parentheses indicate that the reader should put less emphasis on the enclosed material, dashes
indicate that the reader should pay more attention to the material between the dashes. Dashes add
drama—parentheses whisper. Dashes can be used for emphasis in several ways:
A single dash can emphasize material at the beginning or end of a sentence.
Example: After eighty years of dreaming, the elderly man realized it was time to finally revisit
the land of his youth—Ireland.
Example: “The Office”—a harmless television program or a dangerously subversive guide to
delinquency in the workplace?
Two dashes can emphasize material in the middle of a sentence. Some style and grammar guides
even permit you to write a complete sentence within the dashes.
Example: Everything I saw in my new neighborhood—from the graceful elm trees to the
stately brick buildings—reminded me of my alma mater.
Example (complete sentence): The students—they were each over the age of eighteen—lined
up in the streets to vote for the presidential candidates.
Two dashes can emphasize a modifier. Words or phrases that describe a noun can be set off with
dashes if you wish to emphasize them.
Example: The fairgrounds—cold and wet in the October rain—were deserted.
Example: Nettie—her chin held high—walked out into the storm.
2. To indicate sentence introductions or conclusions. You can sometimes use a dash to help
readers see that certain words are meant as an introduction or conclusion to your sentence.

Example: Books, paper, pencils—many students lacked even the simplest tools for learning
in nineteenth-century America.
Example: To improve their health, Americans should critically examine the foods that they eat—fast
food, fatty fried foods, junk food, and sugary snacks.
3. To mark “bonus phrases.” Phrases that add information or clarify but are not necessary to the
meaning of a sentence are ordinarily set off with commas. But when the phrase itself already
contains one or more commas, dashes can help readers understand the sentence.

❌

Slightly confusing example with commas: Even the simplest tasks, washing, dressing,

and going to work, were nearly impossible after I broke my leg.

✔Better example with dashes: Even the simplest tasks—washing, dressing, and going to
work—were nearly impossible after I broke my leg.
4. To break up dialogue. In written dialogue, if a speaker suddenly or abruptly stops speaking,
hesitates in speech, or is cut off by another speaker, a dash can indicate the pause or interruption.
Example: “I—I don’t know what you’re talking about,” denied the politician.
Example: Mimi began to explain herself, saying, “I was thinking—” “I don’t care what you were
thinking,” Rodolpho interrupted.

Hyphen
A hyphen (-) is a
punctuation mark that's
used to join words or
parts of words. The
‐
hyphen
is
a
punctuation mark used to
join
words
and
to
separate syllables of a
single word.

Daw, Raw, Din, at Rin
Daw at Din
Ginagamit sa katinig (consonants), mananatili ang D kung hindi nagtatapos sa A, E, I, O, U,
W, Y ang salita.
Halimbawa:
● Ahas daw ang nakita nila sa dagat.
● Nauntog din si Aleah sa dingding.

Raw at Rin
Ginagamit sa patinig (vowels) at WY, magiging R kung nagtatapos sa A, E, I, O, U, W, Y ang
salita.
Halimbawa:
● Gusto raw nila makita ang dagat.
● May kalabaw rin si Aleah sa bukid.
Special Case
Kung nagtatapos sa RA, RE, RI, RO, RU, RAW, at RAY ang naunang salita, D ang gagamitin
imbis na R.
Halimbawa:
● Ilang araw daw na nasa ospital si Betty.
● Namalengke si Marie doon.

